# Heart Condition Prediction

Abstract  
Advancements in machine learning and deep learning have enabled the development of predictive models enhancing proactive healthcare and health outcomes. However, the effectiveness of models depends on features selection and model configuration. This study aims to identify key prediction features and develop an optimal classification model for heart conditions. Using the dataset from the National Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS6), we develop and compare the accuracy of various ML and DL models for classification tasks. Selected prediction features include general, behavioral health, and medical diagnosis for a target variable heart condition. Once the features and variables are encoded, we scaled and balanced the data synthetically to prevent feature dominance on training. Eight machine learning and deep learning models were built and trained with train-test ratio of 80:20. Prediction performance metrics and execution overhead were then compared. Stacking Ensemble model outperformed other models, with superior classification accuracy (97%; ACU-ROC=1). For no heart condition  the model yielded 96% precision and 97% recall, and for having heart condition, it achieved 97% precision and 96% recall. A significantly higher execution overhead was found to be in deep learning models such as ANN, xLSTM, Tranformer-TabPFN making them less suitable for time-sensitive and real-time tasks.  Our ensemble learning approach enables accurate, cost-effective population-level screening for heart conditions using only survey data, potentially expanding access to early cardiovascular risk assessment in resource-limited settings.
